
%
% the Introduction of my master thesis
%

\chapter{Introduction}
\label{sec:Intro}

Throughout the history, the fields of mathematics and physics have always been 
closely linked to each other. The great physicists of the past have always been 
great mathematicians and vice versa: Carl Friedrich Gauss, for some persons the 
most brilliant mathematician of all, did not only find innumerable mathematical 
relations, prove myriads of theorems and develop countless new ideas, which 
should become rich and fruitful new fields in later mathematics, he also has a 
large number of credits in physics: the recovery of the dwarf planet Ceres ion 
astronomy, new results in electromagnetism (like the \emph{Gauss's law} or a 
representation for the unit of magnetism, which was named after him) and the 
Gaussian lens formula in geometric optics are just some of his best known 
merits. Isaac Newton on the other hand, may have been rather a physicist, but 
it was his so called second law of motion that was the first foundation of 
differential calculus and therefore opened up the door for a completely new 
branch of mathematics. Even if one wants to claim that differential calculus 
was actually invented by Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, this does not change 
anything, since Leibniz wrote many essays on physics and can be considered also 
as the inventor of the concept of kinetic energy (or, as he called it, the 
\emph{vis viva}) and its conservation in certain mechanical systems. Of course 
one has to name Joseph-Louis Lagrange, who was an ingenious mathematician with 
rich contributions to number theory and algebra, but also to the fields of 
analytical mechanics and astronomy. Still today, for every second years physics 
student about half of the mandatory lecture on theoretical mechanics is devoted 
to the Lagrangian formalism and way one can derive the laws of motion for 
various mechanical systems from it. A last name we want to mention here is Paul 
Dirac, who is certainly one of the founding fathers of quantum mechanics. He 
provided the ideas for a lot of structures and relations in differential 
geometry, functional analysis and distribution theory. Many of the concept he 
introduced using his physicist's intuition were later proven to be right or 
used as starting points for new theories by mathematicians.


Many developments in mathematics can be seen as triggered by physics: they were 
necessary to describe the physical behaviour of the world and therefore pushed 
forward by scientists. We already mentioned differential calculus, without 
whom modern analysis, the theory of ordinary or partial differential equations 
or differential geometry would not be possible. Besides the also named field of 
functional analysis, also Lie theory and many parts of geometry provide 
examples for physics inspired mathematics. Of course, this correspondence is 
not a one way street, since the understanding of nature made great progress due 
to a better knowledge of the mathematical laws of her formation. A good example 
therefor is Lebesgue's theory of integration and its application to quantum 
mechanics: the space $L^2(\mathbb{R}^{3n})$ is the state space of standard 
$n$-particle system in quantum mechanics.


There are good reasons to say that this very tight binding of mathematics and 
physics persisted until the 20th century. Without any doubt, those two areas 
are still closely linked, but one could say that at a certain point in history 
they started walking away from each other. Of course, there have always been 
mathematicians who did not take their motivation from physics and physicists 
who did not use elaborate or even invent new math to describe aspects of the 
world around them, but for a long time, the vast majority of both groups showed 
at least an interest for the other domain. This definitely changed during the 
20th century. The main reason for this can surely be found in the extremely 
fast development which of both domains experienced in this time. It is already 
impossible for one person to overview the whole field of mathematics or the one 
of physics, since there are too many new things coming up every day. Another 
reason is surely the fact that modern mathematics is strongly influenced by the 
desire to formulate things as clean as possible, without using handwaving 
''physical arguments''. This is a principle which surely allowed many new and 
powerful evolutions in the last decades and which is mostly due to the Bourbaki 
movement in the middle of the last century, but it also forgets about the fact 
that physical intuition was often a powerful tool for new ideas or also for 
heuristics which led to proofs of important theorems. Another reason, which is 
more situated in the domain of physics, is certainly the incredibly fast 
development of the knowledge about semiconductors. This became possible due to 
quantum mechanics which forms the foundation of this theory, but for the very 
most of modern applications, a basic understanding of the quantum theory behind 
is enough, or one can even get new results with so called semi-classical 
approaches. Here, a lot of new and fruitful results can be established without 
going deep into mathematics and hence without giving a new stimulus to it. In 
this sense, it is enough for many modern physicists to acquire a certain amount 
of mathematical knowledge and then, they never have to care about mathematical 
theories again.


Certainly, the situation is not bad and it would be by far too much to say that 
those fields are falling apart. There are still a lot of intersections of the 
two sciences and  these contact areas provide rich and fruitful 
domains of research. The big number of fields, where either mathematics takes 
its motivation from physics, or where theoretical physics needs very elaborate 
mathematical methods, is usually grouped under the name \emph{mathematical 
physics}. One of its younger areas is the theory of quantization and therein 
the theory deformation quantization can be settled. It belongs to the area of 
pure mathematics, but takes its inspiration from physics and is therefore a 
part of mathematical physics. The idea is, roughly spoken, to find a 
correspondence between the quantum and the classical world in physics. The 
mathematical description of their laws are different but yet they show a lot of 
similarities. It is more or less clear, how the classical world is created out 
of a huge number of quantum objects and the mathematics of classical mechanics 
can be understood as a limit case the behaviour of $n$ quantum objects where 
$n \longrightarrow \infty$. The other way round, it is not clear how one can 
create the mathematical description of a quantum system out of the one of a 
classical system. This reversed process is usually called quantization and its 
understanding is a mathematical task, not a physical one. Deformation 
quantization tries to ''deform'' the idealized algebra of classical physical 
observables by making it noncommutative and to get an idealized algebra of 
quantum mechanical observables this way. This is done by replacing the 
pointwise product of functions (since the classical algebra of obervables is 
usually modelled as the smooth function on a Poisson manifold) with a 
noncommutative product, which takes into account certain derivatives of the 
functions and plugs in the formal parameter $\hbar$. This new product is called 
a star product and becomes a formal power series in $\hbar$. The zeroth order 
in the formal parameter represents classical mechanics and the first order 
quantum mechanics. Different mechanical systems allow different star products 
and their classification has been one of the main tasks of the theory for a 
long time. Besides the purely algebraic aspects of this theory, one also wants 
that this deformation is continuous or smooth in a certain sense and that a 
suitable subalgebra can be found, for which the formal power series is also 
convergent, since $\hbar$ is not a formal parameter in physics, but a nature 
constant with a specific value.


This work focusses on a particular star product, the so called Gutt star 
product, which can be established on a certain class of Poisson manifolds. Its 
goal is to find a large subalgebra of the smooth function and a locally convex 
topology on them, such that the Gutt star product is convergent and that the 
commutative classical algebra can be deformed smoothly into the noncommutative 
quantum algebra. Of course, one has to give a proper definition, how this
smoothness is meant. Moreover, we will try to find as many convenient 
properties of this construction as possible and relate it to other fields of 
mathematics, such as Lie theory. For example, we will see, that the locally 
convex observable algebra is closely linked to a universal enveloping algebra 
and therefore a Hopf algebra.


This master thesis is organized as follows: In the next part, chapter 2, we 
introduce the most important concepts of classical and quantum mechanics, 
explain their relations and give an overview over the field of deformation 
quantization, its history and its current state and classify this work into the  
whole theory. We will also give an outlook on the next steps, which can be done 
using the results of this thesis.\\
In the third chapter, we will explain in more detail the kind of Poisson 
systems this thesis deals with and that they are in fact Lie algebras. We will 
construct the Gutt star product, which is characteristic for those systems, in 
different ways and show that they are equivalent. We will explain the link 
to Lie theory, the Poincar\'e-Birkhoff-Witt and the Baker-Campbell-Hausdorff 
theorem and will therefore explain those results on the 
Baker-Campbell-Hausdorff series, that we will need.\\
Chapter four is devoted to finding explicit formulas for the Gutt star product 
and explaining them using two examples, as well as to some easy conclusions one 
can draw from those formulas.\\
Chapter five is the core part of this work. First, we introduce briefly the 
concept of locally convex topologies and explain why they are the convenient 
setting for our task. We show in detail how the locally convex topology for the 
Gutt star product is constructed, what their properties are and what kind of 
topology our Poisson system must have had before in order to do so. At this 
point, we will introduce the concept of asymptotic \emph{estimate algebras}, 
which can be seen as a concept between locally multiplicatively convex algebras 
an general locally convex ones. Then we will show that the Gutt star product is 
indeed continuous with respect to our topology, that the deformation is 
analytic (even entire, if the underlying field is $\mathbb{C}$), that the 
construction is functorial and we will analyse the completion of our algebra. 
We will also show that this topology is optimal in a certain way.\\
The sixth chapter is devoted to particular systems, namely to nilpotent Lie 
algebras. We will show how the results we found previously can be increased, 
but we will also find the limits of our construction. We will also establish 
the link to a previous work of Stefan Waldmann's and show that we come to the 
same conclusion by taking our way. Finally, we will see that those stronger 
results are not bounded to the very case of strictly nilpotent Lie algebras, 
but that there are, in infinite dimensions and only there, weaker notions of 
nilpotency which lead to the same result, when the construction of the 
topology is adapted.\\
In the end, chapter seven treats the Hopf algebraic part which is very short 
due to the algebraic properties of the deformation. We will see that in fact 
the co-structure and the antipode are not deformed and continuous with respect 
to our topology, too.\\
In the appendix, we will give some more informations about asymptotic estimate 
algebras and try to settle them as precisely as possible among the locally 
convex algebras. We will also treat some examples and think about possible 
future developments in this theory.


I want to thank my advisor, Stefan Waldmann, for the time he invested in this 
work and for his intense supervision. I am also very grateful to Chiara 
Esposito, Matthias Sch\"otz and Thorsten Reichert for many fruitful discussions 
and their patience with me bothering them with questions.
